XS-Search, Navigations (add Server-Side Redirects + Downloads) XS-Leaks (#19)
xsleaks/wiki: content/docs/attacks/navigations.md

menu = "main"
+++

Detecting if a cross-site page triggered a navigation can be useful to an attacker.  This can be done in two ways:
- Using an `iframe` and counting the number of times the `onload` event is triggered.
- Checking the value of `History.length`, accessible through any `window` reference, gives the number of entries in the history of a victim either changed by `History.pushState` or regular navigations. To get the value of `History.length` an attacker changes the location of the `window` reference with the target website, changes back to same-origin, and finally reads the value.

## Download Trigger

> When endpoints set [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header, it forces the browser to download the response as an attachment. Detecting if this behavior occurred might allow attackers to leak private information, considering it as a state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When endpoints set the [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header, it forces the browser to download the response as an attachment instead of navigating to it. Detecting if this behavior occurred might allow attackers to leak private information, considering it as a state
```
This sentence looks unfinished

### Download bar

In Chromium-based browsers when a file is downloaded, a preview of the download process appears in a bar at the bottom, integrated into the browser window. By monitoring the window height attackers could detect whether the "download bar" opened.

```javascript

// Any Window reference (can also be done using an iframe in some cases)
const tab = window.opener;

// The current window height
const screenHeight = window.innerHeight;

> // The size of the chrome download bar on mac os x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The size of the chrome download bar on, for example, mac os x
```

const downloadsBarSize = 49;

tab.location = 'https://target';

setTimeout(() => {
    let margin = screenHeight - window.innerHeight;
    if (margin === downloadsBarSize) {
       return console.log('downloads bar detected');
    }
}, 5 * 1000);
```

{{< hint info >}}
This attack is only possible in Chromium-based browsers.
{{< /hint >}}

### Download Navigation

Another way to test for the [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header is to check if a navigation occurred. If a page load triggers a download, it will not trigger a navigation. 

1. Open an attacker origin with `window.open` and save the window reference.
2. Navigate the saved reference to the endpoint that might download.
3. After a timeout, check if the window is still same-origin

> The snippet presented in [Cross-Window Timing](httpps://TODO) XS-Leak can be slightly adapted to detect this behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The snippet presented in the [Cross-Window Timing](httpps://TODO) XS-Leak can be slightly adapted to detect this behavior.
```

#### Download Navigation (without timeout)

> The following snippet can do a more precise measurement, without relying on timeouts and imprecise timings. The attack works as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following snippet can obtain a more precise measurement without relying on timeouts and imprecise timings. The attack works as follows:
```

> 1. Include an iframe (inner) inside an iframe (outer). The inner iframe embeds the target website.

Reviewer: I would put the explanation after the code. I would only add a sentence before that says that explanation follows.

Author: Fixed in 516b13d

2. If the target website triggers a download the inner iframe origin will **remain** `about:blank` (downloads don’t navigate).

> 3. The outer iframe waits until `onload` triggers. The observation is that even though the download attempt doesn't trigger an `onload` event the window still "waits" for the resource to be downloaded.

Reviewer: How do you know then if the download started (nothing fired)? Do you have to use a timer?

Author: We discussed this in a meeting.

Summary: It does not matter. The attacks works only based on wether the download triggered (remains same origin), or triggers a navigation (`inner.contentWindow.location.href` is accessible). Either way, onload will always trigger.

4. If a navigation occurs, the inner iframe will change origin's and both will now be different. 
5. Finally, the outer iframe verifies if `i.contentWindow.location.href` (line 8) is accessible, only possible if both iframes share the same origin (Same-Origin Policy is enforced). If both iframes are in different origins, a `DOMException` will be thrown, meaning a navigation occurred.

{{< highlight javascript "linenos=table,linenostart=1" >}}
onmessage = e => console.log(e.data);
var outer = document.createElement('iframe');
var url = 'https://target';
outer.src = `data:text/html,\
            <iframe id='inner' src="${url}" ></iframe>
            <!-- onload is part of outer iframe -->

>             <script>onload=()=>{

Reviewer: Is onload only fired if the inner frame is done loading? If so, what will happen with big downloads? Will it fire at the beginning or at the end?

Author: This was discussed during a meeting.

Summary: onload does not fire based on the download size

                try {

>                     i.contentWindow.location.href;

Reviewer: `i` is undefined here I think.

Author: Correct. I fixed it.

                    top.postMessage('download attempt','*');
                } catch(e) {
                    top.postMessage('no download','*');
                }
            }%3c/script>`;
outer.onload = ()=>{outer.remove();}
document.body.appendChild(outer);
{{< / highlight >}}

<!-- 
## Case Scenarios

- An online bank decides to redirect wealthy users to unmissable stock opportunities by triggering a navigation to a reserved space in the website when users are consulting the account balance. If this is only done to a specific group of users, it becomes possible for an attacker to leak the "client status" of the user. -->
<!--TODO(manuelvsousa): Add better examples-->

> <!--TODO(manuelvsousa): evaluate if we are keeping case scenarios in the wiki-->

Reviewer: Please address this before merging.

Reviewer: I think in this specific case having an example would be beneficial.

## Server-Side Redirects

### Inflation

> A server-side redirect can be detected from a cross-origin page when the destination URL increase in size and reflects a user input, either in the form of a query string parameter or a path. The following technique relies on the fact it is possible to induce an error in most web-servers by overloading the request parameters/path. Since the redirect increases the size of the URL, it can be detected by sending exactly one character less than the server maximum capacity, that way, if the size increases the server will respond with an error code which can be detected from a cross-origin page using common DOM APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A server-side redirect can be detected from a cross-origin page when the destination URL increase in size and reflects a user input, either in the form of a query string parameter or a path. The following technique relies on the fact that it is possible to induce an error in most web-servers by generating big requests parameters/paths. Since the redirect increases the size of the URL, it can be detected by sending exactly one character less than the server maximum capacity. That way if the size increases the server will respond with an error code which can be detected from a cross-origin page using common DOM APIs.
```

#### Download Navigation (without timeout)

The following snippet can obtain a more precise measurement without relying on timeouts and imprecise timings.

{{< highlight javascript "linenos=table,linenostart=1" >}}
onmessage = e => console.log(e.data);
var outer = document.createElement('iframe');
var url = 'https://target';
outer.src = `data:text/html,\
            <iframe id='inner' src="${url}" ></iframe>
            <!-- onload is part of outer iframe -->
            <script>onload=()=>{
                try {
                    inner.contentWindow.location.href;
                    top.postMessage('download attempt','*');
                } catch(e) {
                    top.postMessage('no download','*');
                }
            }%3c/script>`;
outer.onload = ()=>{outer.remove();}
document.body.appendChild(outer);
{{< / highlight >}}

The attack works as follows:

1. Include an iframe (inner) inside an iframe (outer). The inner iframe embeds the target website.
2. If the target website triggers a download the inner iframe origin will **remain** `about:blank` (downloads don’t navigate).

> 3. Even though the download attempt doesn't trigger an `onload` event on the inner `iframe`, the window of the `outer` iframe (line 7) still waits for the resource to start the download.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Even though the download attempt doesn't trigger an `onload` event on the inner `iframe`, the window of the `outer` iframe (line 7) still waits for the resource to start the download and fires the `onload` event.
```

> 4. If a navigation occurs, the inner iframe will change its origin. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If a navigation has occurred the inner `iframe` will change its origin. 
```

> 5. Finally, the outer iframe verifies if `i.contentWindow.location.href` (line 9) is accessible, only possible if both iframes share the same origin (Same-Origin Policy is enforced). If both iframes are in different origins, a `DOMException` will be thrown, meaning a navigation occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. When the outer `iframe` `onload` fires the outer iframe verifies if `i.contentWindow.location.href` (line 9) is accessible, only possible if both iframes share the same origin (Same-Origin Policy is enforced). If both iframes are in different origins, a `DOMException` will be thrown, meaning a navigation occurred.
```

menu = "main"
+++

Detecting if a cross-site page triggered a navigation (or didn't) can be useful to an attacker. For example, a website may trigger a navigation in a certain endpoint [depending on the status of the user]({{< ref "#case-scenarios" >}}).

> To detect if **any kind** of navigation occurred, an attacker can do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To detect if **any kind** of navigation occurred, an attacker can:
```

> - Using an `iframe` and counting the number of times the `onload` event is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use an `iframe` and count the number of times the `onload` event is triggered.
```

> - Checking the value of `History.length`, accessible through any `window` reference, gives the number of entries in the history of a victim either changed by `History.pushState` or regular navigations. To get the value of `History.length` an attacker changes the location of the `window` reference with the target website, changes back to same-origin, and finally reads the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the value of `History.length`, accessible through any `window` reference. This gives the number of entries in the history of a victim either changed by `History.pushState` or regular navigations. To get the value of `History.length` an attacker changes the location of the `window` reference with the target website, changes back to same-origin, and finally reads the value.
```

## Download Trigger

> When endpoints set the [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header, it forces the browser to download the response as an attachment instead of navigating to it. Detecting if this behavior occurred might allow attackers to leak private information, considering it as a state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When endpoints set the [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header, it instructs the browser to download the response as an attachment instead of navigating to it. Detecting if this behavior occurred might allow attackers to leak private information, considering this outcome might depend on the state of the victim's account and navigations.
```

### Download bar

In Chromium-based browsers when a file is downloaded, a preview of the download process appears in a bar at the bottom, integrated into the browser window. By monitoring the window height attackers could detect whether the "download bar" opened.

```javascript

// Any Window reference (can also be done using an iframe in some cases)
const tab = window.opener;

// The current window height
const screenHeight = window.innerHeight;

// The size of the chrome download bar on, for example, mac os x
const downloadsBarSize = 49;

tab.location = 'https://target';

setTimeout(() => {
    let margin = screenHeight - window.innerHeight;
    if (margin === downloadsBarSize) {
       return console.log('downloads bar detected');
    }
}, 5 * 1000);
```

{{< hint info >}}
This attack is only possible in Chromium-based browsers.
{{< /hint >}}

### Download Navigation

> Another way to test for the [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header is to check if a navigation occurred. If a page load triggers a download, it will not trigger a navigation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to test for the [`Content-Disposition: attachment`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Disposition) Header is to check if a navigation occurred. If a page load causes a download, it will not trigger a navigation. 
```

#### Download Navigation (without timeout)

The following snippet can obtain a more precise measurement without relying on timeouts and imprecise timings.

{{< highlight javascript "linenos=table,linenostart=1" >}}
onmessage = e => console.log(e.data);
var outer = document.createElement('iframe');
var url = 'https://target';
outer.src = `data:text/html,\
            <iframe id='inner' src="${url}" ></iframe>
            <!-- onload is part of outer iframe -->
            <script>onload=()=>{
                try {
                    inner.contentWindow.location.href;
                    top.postMessage('download attempt','*');
                } catch(e) {
                    top.postMessage('no download','*');
                }
            }%3c/script>`;
outer.onload = ()=>{outer.remove();}
document.body.appendChild(outer);
{{< / highlight >}}

The attack works as follows:

1. Include an iframe (inner) inside an iframe (outer). The inner iframe embeds the target website.
2. If the target website triggers a download the inner iframe origin will **remain** `about:blank` (downloads don’t navigate).

> 3. The outer iframe waits until `onload` triggers. The observation is that even though the download attempt doesn't trigger an `onload` event the window still "waits" for the resource to be downloaded.

Reviewer: Didn't we say that the download triggers the `onload` event? And why is "waits" in quotes?

And if it indeed doesn't trigger onload, doesn't this mean the script above is not executed?

Author: > Didn't we say that the download triggers the onload event? 

I don't think so. Downloads do not trigger a navigation, and that's important. The observation here is to detect whether the iframe remained about:blank or changed to another origin. Also: https://github.com/xsleaks/wiki/pull/19#discussion_r493029621

> And if it indeed doesn't trigger onload, doesn't this mean the script above is not executed?

Sorry, I don't understand the question. `onload` is always triggered, whether remaining about:blank, or another origin.

We can discuss this better.

> And why is "waits" in quotes?

Because while the the window remains `about:blank` when onload triggers, it's guaranteed the window also waited for the download attempt.

Reviewer: I think this would need a better explanation.

Also you wrote:
>Downloads do not trigger a navigation

and immediately after
> onload is always triggered

So which is it?

Author: The inner iframe does not trigger the onload (Download does not trigger the onload), but the window of the outer does wait.
Fixed in eac6bf2.

Sorry for the confusion. Can you please see if it's clearer now?

> 4. If a navigation occurs, the inner iframe will change origin's and both will now be different. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If a navigation occurs, the inner iframe will change origin. 
```
